# Alonso, Carlos J et al. *Crises and Opportunities: The Futures of Scholarly Publishing*. ACLS Occasional Paper, No. 57. New York: American Council of Learned Societies, 2003.


## Introduction

"In 1958, the American Council of Learned Societies sponsored a study to determine whether or not scholarly manuscripts face difficulties extrinsic to their merit in attaining publication. The study concluded that 'in most branches of the humanities and social sciences, at the present time, the uncomplicated scholarly manuscript of good quality can usually count upon reasonably rapid publication at no expense to the author.' This happy state of affairs was traced back to a major Ford Foundation program supporting university presses. Unfortunately, the past is indeed another country, and we can't get there from here." (Alonso et al 1)

"In many fields, the published monograph is the primary currency of academic prominence and promotion. Yet fiscal pressures have caused many university presses to restrict their publication of scholarly monographs." (Alonso et al 1)

"Perhaps too many monographs are published. Some books could be better as articles, it is suggested, and articles should be sufficient credentials for tenure." (Alonso et al 2)

"The 'crisis' of the scholarly monograph, then, is not merely a crisis in the economics of scholarly publishing, but also in the processes of peer review and academic self-governance, prompting reflection on practices of scholarly evaluation that we have simply taken for granted." (Alonso et al 2)

## Carlos J. Alonso

summary of evidence cited on behalf of the crisis in publishing in the humanities; exploration of two suggested solutions

"Of the many suggestions that have been advanced to deal with the crisis in scholarly publishing, two have been received with particular enthusiasm because of their seeming viability.  The first is that universities move away from 'the book' as the unit of measure in tenure and promotion cases and that the candidate produce instead a collection of articles as the corpus to be evaluated.  The second is that universities establish for humanities departments a publication subvention attached to every junior professor's line, much like -- but requiring far less funding than -- the start-up capital that faculty positions in the sciences are endowed with as a matter of course." (Alonso et al, Alonso 8)

"The first demands that we have the courage to revise our standards and challenge our prejudices about the value of articles relative to books (not an inconsiderable undertaking), but in the end it is cost-free and up to us, as long as we can persuade our extradepartmental colleagues and administrators to agree to its terms. The second requires that new funds be obtained, makes equal demands on us to challenge our prejudices—this time about the role of money in the publication of scholarship—and asks us to depend on the kindness of quasi strangers (administrators)." (Alonso et al, Alonso 11)

"Our foremost concern must always be how to preserve the integrity of our scholarly contributions, not how to beat the system merely because it now constrains us." (Alonso et al, Alonso 11)

Philip Lewis rejoinder to Lindsay Waters, suggesting that journals are in the same straits as are books, and that shifting production to articles therefore won't solve the problem

refers to the publication subvention idea as bold and inventive

"If 'the book' has become the principal piece of scholarly evidence introduced by candidates for their tenure cases, it is not necessarily because it is fetishized but rather because built into the writing and publication of a book are safeguards that purport to ensure the quality of the final product (though they may not always do so in fact)." (Alonso et al, Alonso 13)

acknowledges that "the promise of a subvention would make it impossible to claim that a manuscript had indeed undergone the normal review process," as presses would likely find themselves more attracted to authors from well-heeled institutions (Alonso et al, Alonso 14)

an eminently reasonable question:  "why not continue the practice, where applicable, of considering the book manuscript of a candidate for promotion or tenure but uncouple the manuscript's worth as determined by internal and external reviewers (and therefore its author's tenure prospects) from its fortunes in search of a publisher?" (Alonso et al, Alonso 15)

"We need to find ways to have a manuscript vetted by specialists in its field other than solely through evaluation by university presses." (Alonso et al, Alonso 16) -- which is precisely, I think, what a digital publishing network could facilitate -- but he winds up lapsing back into thinking about traditional university presses and subventions (except now competitively awarded!); at the furthest outside the box, he stretches to thinking about having professional associations like the MLA take charge of such a program

on the other hand, he does mention the National Academies Press, "which offers its entire holdings free of charge on the Internet while turning a profit" as a potential model (Alonso et al, Alonso 17)

"The line that separates boldness from recklessness is at times hard to draw, but the younger members of our profession are looking to established scholars with increased expectations for concrete action that must not go unfulfilled." (Alonso et al, Alonso 17)

## Cathy N. Davidson

"University press publishing has many portals and, as individuals, we enter variously as students, scholars, teachers, mentors, editors, and administrators.  Institutionally, we also have different relationships to scholarly publishing -- as professional organizations, private universities, public universities, libraries, electronic publishers, and a range of different presses. It is important to have all of these -- individually and institutionally -- represented in our discussion because it forecloses the possibility of thinking there is some utopian 'elsewhere' where there is no problem. There is a problem, and we are all part of it." (Alonso et al, Davidson 21-22)

"A sampling of the essays written on this topic over the last three or four years makes it abundantly clear that we do not need more diagnoses of the problem. We've had plenty of those: The problem is that we have tied tenure to the publication of a scholarly book. No, others say: uncoupling tenure from books cannot solve the problem because journals are in trouble, too. Others suggest that the problem is the scholarly monograph itself, or that the problem is curtailed library spending on humanities books. The problem is price-gauging [sic] by commercial publishers of science journals, necessitating that libraries spend less money on humanities and social science publications. The problem is chain bookstores, the dwindling number of independent bookstores, and the increasing conservatism of those that remain. The problem is electronic booksellers like Amazon.com with their heavy discounting and selling of used books. The problem is that books cost too much to produce. The problem is that electronic publishing is too expensive and doesn’t work for monographs. The problem is shrinking subsidies to presses in the wake of cutbacks to higher education for state universities. The problem is shrinking subsidies to presses in light of dwindling returns on endowments and diminished philanthropy at private universities. The problem is that many universities that depend upon academic publications (books or journal articles) to award tenure don’t have presses of their own -- they are 'mooching off' everyone else. The problem is the corporatizing of the university. The problem is the sciences. The problem is the changing demographics of higher education: there are fewer assistant professors and graduate students who are the primary book buyers (as well as the primary authors of articles in refereed journals). The problem is that the course pak has substituted for the assigned secondary classroom text. The problem is that the jargon of postmodern critical theory has shrunken the audience for the humanities. The problem is that the critical theory boom has ended, and no one is excitedly reading every new book any more. The problem is that, since 9/11, people are watching CNN and not buying books, trade or academic. The problem is that university press books are underpriced relative to their production costs. The problem is that university press books cost too much relative to the income of their target audience. The problem is too many books. The problem is too few books. The problem is too many books of one kind and too few of another. The problem is students don’t know how to read any more. The problem is that almost all of the above are part of the problem." (Alonso et al, Davidson 22-23)
 - "The bottom line is that scholarly publishing isn’t financially feasible as a business model -- never was, never was intended to be, and should not be. *If scholarship paid, we wouldn’t need university presses.*" (Alonso et al, Davidson 24)

"my recommendations have almost nothing to do with 'saving' university press publishing. Quite frankly, I am not interested in propping up fragile university press publishing businesses if what they offer is simply a watered-down version of trade publishing. I’ve published several books with trade publishers; they do a good job getting those books out to a large, general readership. My motivation in being on this panel at the ACLS Annual Meeting is to find ways to save the kind of scholarship academics are trained to write and that is the basis of teaching and research at colleges and universities." (Alonso et al, Davidson 25)

"What we need is acknowledgment that scholarly publishing costs more than we are spending on it. It requires substantial subsidies and new ideas about where those infusions of capital might come from and how costs might be dispersed more equitably among those who benefit most from scholarly publishing -- namely, scholars themselves." (Alonso et al, Davidson 26)

"What is the over-all cost/benefit of the university press in terms of reputation and luster? Provosts should not only be seeing red when the university press is mentioned; they should be seeing an opportunity." (Alonso et al, Davidson 33)

"We academics cannot continue to see ourselves as innocents in a process whose fate is decided by others. Innocence is not bliss -- it is professional suicide. The problem of university press publishing is our problem, and we must solve it." (Alonso et al, Davidson 34)

## John Unsworth

"Perhaps we simply can't afford to continue publishing as we have. In fact, perhaps the audience for humanities monographs is so small that this sort of book publishing can never be profitable. This assumption is at the core of Stevan Harnad’s 1994 'Subversive Proposal.' Broadly speaking, Harnad claims that scholars are more interested in having their work read and used than they are in making money from it; that scholars have hitherto signed their work over to publishers because, in the print world, that was the only way to disseminate their work so that it would be read and used; and that in the electronic world, authors don’t need to make this 'Faustian bargain.' According to Harnard, when the audience for scholarship is small, there's really no way that a publisher can afford to publish a book anyway, and the reduced cost of electronic-only publishing for small audiences should be met in advance -- by subsidies or through page charges." (Alonso et al, Unsworth 39-40)

"perhaps these changes are more likely to come from the bottom up than from the top down; more likely to come from authors than from tenure committees, journals, or publishers." (Alonso et al, Unsworth 40)

"Now, I wouldn't for a minute suggest that these thematic research collections are less expensive to produce than a scholarly book -- far from it. Nor would I suggest that they are an easier nut to crack, from the point of view of the business of publishing. Still, in spite of both these points, I do think they may be more viable, because they have something that most scholarly books do not: namely, an audience. It's hard to sell five hundred copies of most humanities monographs; even fewer sell in the thousands. And yet these Web-based projects, on relatively esoteric subjects, receive thousands of visitors each day, serve up gigabytes of their content to avid users each week, and reach readers of all ages, inside and outside academia, all around the world. The only problem is that they're free." (Alonso et al, Unsworth 41)

"Maybe we could enlarge the audience for humanities scholarship not by dumbing it down, but by making it more readily available. Maybe if we did that, scholars would find an audience first, and a publisher second, instead of the other way around." (Alonso et al, Unsworth 43)

## Lynne Withey

"First, we must confront the high cost of the front end of the process: acquiring, peer reviewing, and editing manuscripts. Second, we must stop being obsessed with output, because format -- print, electronic, article length, book length -- is rapidly becoming a non-issue, for reasons I'll address shortly. And finally, since scholarly publishing is a system involving many players, it must be analyzed as a system. No one player can resolve this crisis alone." (Alonso et al, Withey 48)

"We need to take a hard look at the organization of the publishing process and its costs, and think about ways of managing those costs more effectively by leveraging what different groups within the scholarly community are already doing -- or can do more efficiently than others. If faculty and scholarly societies are already managing the editorial process for journals, is it a great leap for them to extend their work to book series? (Some societies, in fact, already publish books.) If digital libraries and university computing centers have already developed sophisticated technical infrastructures, can they extend their technical expertise to include providing electronic publishing services? Finally, in this mix of players and talents, what can publishers most usefully offer? In a collaborative model involving other partners, publishers can provide several kinds of services: brokering print, where our contracts with large vendors allow for lower costs; marketing, sales and distribution, functions in which publishers excel and where we can also achieve significant economies of scale." (Alonso et al, Withey 51-52)
