Bousquet, Marc. How the University Works: Higher Education and the Low-Wage Nation.  New York: NYU Press, 2008.

Foreword, Cary Nelson

"What models of higher education have a chance to survive the effects of commodification, quantification, and corporatization? Marc believes that the university can recover its powers of critique, but only after we admit its thorough penetration by capital.  Indeed throughout its history, the university had never had complete autonomy.  What it has had, to use the Althusserian term, is a set of continually renegotiated and variable forms of relative autonomy." (xvi)

"Having devoted a century to analyzing literary objects of adulation and a few decades to interrogating less appealing regimes of power, the job system compels us to turn inward.  It is ourselves we must scrutinize, however reluctant we are to do so.  We are the people who staff and maintain the system that exists.  It operates not merely with our consent but with our sustaining labor." (xvi)
1. Introduction

"Campus administrations have steadily diverged from the ideals of faculty governance, collegiality, and professional self-determination.  Instead they have embraced the values and practices of corporate management." (1)

"Traditionally, the phenomenon known as the 'cross-subsidy,' the support of one program by revenue generated by another program, primarily meant a modest surplus provided by the higher tuition and lower salaries associated with undergraduate education; this income was used to support research activity that was unlikely to find an outside funding agent.  Under managed higher education, cross-subsidy has eroded undergraduate learning throughout the curriculum and become a gold mine supporting the entrepreneurial urges, vanity, and hobbyhorses of administrators" (7)

"If this sounds Orwellian, or a bit like Foucault goes to business school, it should.  In adopting a management theory founded on the dissemination of a carefully designed organizational culture, campus administrations were like most U.S. corporate management in putting to practical use the lessons in cultural materialism they'd learned in humanities classes." (12)

the "job-market theory" relies "on the counterfactual assumption that 'institutions always wantto have more faculty and will add faculty positions when they can afford to do so'... In reality, every nook and cranny of the public discourse on the question held reams of evidence attesting that what institutions really wanted was to accumulate capital and conserve labor costs by casualizing faculty positions by any means available" (18)

"What needs to be clear is that this is not a 'system our of control,' a machine with a thrown rod or a blown gasket. Quite the contrary: it's a smoothly functioning new system with its own easily apprehensible logic, premised entirely on the continuous replacement of degree holders with nondegreed labor (or persons with degrees willing to work on unfavorable terms)." (24)

"We are not 'overproducing Ph.D.s'; we are underproducing jobs.  There is plenty of work in higher education for everyone who wants to do it.  The problem is that this enormous quantity of work no longer comes in the bundle of tenure, dignity, scholarship, and a living wage that we call 'a job.'" (40-41)

"Late capitalism doesn't just happen to the university; the university makes late capitalism happen." (44)
