Chartier, Roger.  Forms and Meanings: Texts, Performances, and Audiences from Codex to Computer.  Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1995.

Introduction

"How are we to understand the ways in which the form that transmits a text to its readers or hearers constrains the production of meaning?" (1)

Chartier warns against "setting up too rigid a dichotomy" between cultural production and consumption, or between creation and appropriation, arguing that "Undeniably, reading is exemplary of that division of functions, because it is the construction of a meaning on the basis of a text or a book that was not produced by that reader. But what is true of reading is not necessarily true of all 'popular' cultural practices. Other practices - the practices of ordinary writing offer one example - are indeed appropriations (of models, of codes, of forms, of objects) but they create a place of their own and presuppose a fixing process and a duration. They, too, were strategies.  There is, therefore, no necessary connection between the social definition of appropriations and the type of practice that serves as a vehicle for them." (4)

1. Representations of the Written Word

"Our current revolution is obviously more extensive than Gutenberg's. It modifies not only the technology for reproduction of the text, but even the materiality of the object that communicates the text to its readers." (15) -- but the really key modification is in bridging the divide between reading and writing; the object, or platform, that "communicates the text to its readers" is similarly a platform upon which those readers can write

"The revolution of the electronic text will also be a revolution in reading. To read on a screen is not to read in a codex. The electronic representation of texts completely changes the text's status; for the materiality of the book, it substitutes the immateriality of texts without a unique location; against the relations of contiguity established in the print objects, it opposes the free composition of infinitely manipulable fragments; in place of the immediate apprehension of the whole work, made visible by the object that embodies it, it introduces a lengthy navigation in textual archipelagoes that have neither shores nor borders. Such changes inevitably, imperatively require new ways of reading, new relationships to the written word, new intellectual techniques. While earlier revolutions in reading took place without changing the fundamental structure of the book, such will not be the case in our own world. The revolution that has begun is, above all, a revolution in the media and forms that transmit the written word." (18)

That the scroll had to be held with two hands produced "the impossibility of a reader's writing and reading at the same time, and thus, too, the importance of dictation. The reader was liberated by the codex. Resting on a table or lectern, the book in quires no longer required participation of so much of the body. One might thus distance oneself, reading and writing at the same time, moving at one's own pace from page to page, from book to book." (19-20)

"In the world of electronic texts, or, more appropriately, of the electronic representation of texts, two constraints that have been considered insurmountable until now may be eliminated. The first constraint is that which narrowly limits the reader's interaction with the text. Since the sixteenth century - in other words, since printers took charge of the signs, marks, and chapter or running titles that were added manually to the printed page by the reader-emedator or book owner in the time of incunabula - the reader can only insinuate his or her own writing in the virgin spaces of the book. The printed object imposes its form, structure, and layout without in any way presupposing the reader's participation. A reader who nevertheless intends to inscribe his or her presence in the object can do so only by surreptitiously, clandestinely occupying the spaces in the book that have been left free of printing: interiors of covers, blank pages, margins of the text. // With the electronic text, matters will never again be the same. The reader can not only subject an electronic text to numerous processes (index it, annotate it, copy it, disassemble it, recompose it, move it), but, better yet, become its coauthor. The distinction that is highly visible int he printed book between writing and reading, between the author of the text and the reader of the book, will disappear in the face of an altogether different reality: one in which the reader becomes an actor of multivocal composition or, at the very least, is in a position to create new texts from fragments that have been freely spliced and reassembled." (20)

"The communication of texts over distances annuls the heretofore insoluble distinction between the place of the text and the place of the reader" (21) -- but it also presents the potential to annul the separation among the places of readers, bringing them together as a group

4. Popular Appropriations: The Readers and Their Books

"The 'popular' cannot be found ready-made in a set of texts or habits that merely need to be identified, listed, and described. Above all, the 'popular' can indicate a kind of relation, a way of using cultural products or norms that are shared, more or less, by society at large, but understood, defined, and used in styles that vary." (89)

de Certeau's distinction between strategies and tactics; tactics as "'ways of doing,' or better yet, 'of doing with.'" (90)

"Apparently passive and submissive, reading is, in fact, in its own way, inventive and creative." (90)

"This image of the reader poaching on a text that is not his own raises a fundamental question of all cultural history or sociology: that of the variation, according to time and place, of social groups and 'interpretive communities,' of the conditions of possibility, and of the methods and effects of this poaching." (91)
