Grunberg, Gérald, and Alain Giffard. “New Orders of Knowledge, New Technologies of Reading.” Representations 42 (Spring 1993): 80-93.


"Reading is already in and of itself a highly complex practice to which any national library is especially devoted. More than other libraries, a national library is supposed to contain considerable holdings of primary sources. This is what makes the British Library, the Library of Congress, or the Bibliothèque nationale so special. But even the best collection of holdings remains a dead letter if it is not accompanied by a technological apparatus that permits access to it. No matter how compelling the fantasy of the perfect preservation of the past may be, a library only becomes an active site of memory and of knowledge when it enables the meeting between its holdings and its readers. And just as there is no collection whose choice of contents, mode of organization, and means of access do not determine the perception and reaction that each reader has of and to it, there is also no such thing as an innocent reader." (Grunberg and Giffard 80)

"the old representation of the library as a document-processing chain remains valid. But another representation is called for, according to which different categories of information constitute as many images, as many aspects, of the library: scientific activity (lists of acquisitions), bibliographic activity (the catalog), maintenance of collections (inventory, the "medical chart"), circulation management (localizations, in the widest sense, of the document)." (Grunberg and Giffard 88)

"Does the electronic revolution imply the adaptation of certain preexisting givens, linked to the automation of older practices that simply opens up new possibilities, like, for example, the rapid transfer of documents? Or, on the contrary, should we take seriously the hypothesis according to which we are witnessing the advent of a completely new medium comparable to the invention of printing?" (Grunberg and Giffard 89)

"if we are witnessing at present the arrival of a new technology of knowledge and of memory, how can the library, the institution of reading and of writing, the place where books are read and written, how can the library stand by and simply contemplate what is going on around it? A passive response to this question implies the end of the very idea of the library, or of the library that does not simply react to the political will of a government. A library is not simply a collection, but an institution where reading professionals participate in the definition of what we now call the 'media.'" (Grunberg and Giffard 90)

"Scholars read with the goal of producing a work: a monograph, a thesis, or an article. Their reading is organized incrementally; with, of course, numerous putting downs and taking ups that will require a system for memory notes, and for the classification of notes in order that electronic reading produce that which traditional reading now produces -- that is, a piece of writing." (Grunberg and Giffard 91)

"The structural logic of the library is still based upon its catalog; it is only at a secondary phase that the construction of a truly electronic library will be possible. Only then will the reader be able to move freely from the catalog to dictionaries, from dictionaries to various indexes, from indexes to this or that section of a particular work, etc. The reader will then be able not only to read and work in front of the screen but to find within the information system the richness and order of the library itself." (Grunberg and Giffard 92)
