Lessig, Lawrence. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control Creativity. New York: Penguin Press, 2004.


"The work of a lawyer is always derivative, and I mean to do nothing more in this book than to remind a culture about a tradition that has always been its own." (Lessig xv)

"A free culture is not a culture without property; it is not a culture in which artists don’t get paid. A culture without property, or in which creators can’t get paid, is anarchy, not freedom. Anarchy is not what I advance here. // Instead,the free culture that I defend in this book is a balance between anarchy and control. A free culture, like a free market, is filled with property. It is filled with rules of property and contract that get enforced by the state. But just as a free market is perverted if its property becomes feudal, so too can a free culture be queered by extremism in the property rights that define it." (Lessig xvi)

"this book is about an effect of the Internet beyond the Internet itself: an effect upon how culture is made.  My claim is that the Internet has induced an important and unrecognized change in that process.  That change will radically transform a tradition that is as old as the Republic itself." (Lessig 7)

"At the beginning of our history, and for just about the whole of our tradition, noncommercial culture was essentially unregulated.... The ordinary ways in which ordinary individuals shared and transformed their culture -- telling stories, reenacting scenes from plays or TV, participating in fan clubs, sharing music, making tapes -- were left alone by the law.... For the first time in our tradition, the ordinary ways in which individuals create and share culture fall within the reach of the regulation of the law, which has expanded to draw within its control a vast amount of culture and creativity that it never reached before.  The technology that preserved the balance of our history -- between uses of our culture that were free and uses of our culture that were only upon permission -- has been undone.  The consequence is that we are less and less a free culture, more and more a permission culture." (Lessig 8)

"This is not a protectionism to protect artists.  It is instead a protectionism to protect certain forms of business.  Corporations threatened by the potential of the Internet to change the way both commercial and noncommercial culture are made and shared have united to induce lawmakers to use the law to protect them." (Lessig 9)

"I have become increasingly amazed by the power of this idea of intellectual property and, more importantly, its power to disable critical thought by policy makers and citizens. There has never been a time in our history when more of our 'culture' was as 'owned' as it is now. And yet there has never been a time when the concentration of power to control the uses of culture has been as unquestioningly accepted as it is now." (Lessig 12)

"the core claim of this book: that while the Internet has indeed produced something fantastic and new, our government, pushed by big media to respond to this “something new,” is destroying something very old.Rather than understanding the changes the Internet might permit, and rather than taking time to let “common sense” resolve how best to respond, we are allowing those most threatened by the changes to use their power to change the law — and more importantly, to use their power to change something fundamental about who we have always been." (Lessig 13)

"in our tradition, intellectual property is an instrument. It sets the groundwork for a richly creative society but remains subservient to the value of creativity. The current debate has this turned around. We have become so concerned with protecting the instrument that we are losing sight of the value. // The source of this confusion is a distinction that the law no longer takes care to draw — the distinction between republishing someone’s work on the one hand and building upon or transforming that work on the other. Copyright law at its birth had only publishing as its concern; copyright law today regulates both." (Lessig 19)

"We live in a world that celebrates 'property.' I am one of those celebrants. I believe in the value of property in general, and I also believe in the value of that weird form of property that lawyers call 'intellectual property.' A large, diverse society cannot survive without property; a large, diverse, and modern society cannot flourish without intellectual property." (Lessig 28)

chapter showing the birth of contemporary mainstream media practices in piracy (film -- H'wood founded by those who stole Edison's process; music -- recording industry originally pirated from composers; radio -- pirating recording artists' work; cable tv -- pirating broadcast tv)

"If 99.4 percent is not good enough, then this is a war on file-sharing technologies,not a war on copyright infringement. There is no way to assure that a p2p system is used 100 percent of the time in compliance with the law, any more than there is a way to assure that 100 percent of VCRs or 100 percent of Xerox machines or 100 percent of handguns are used in compliance with the law. Zero tolerance means zero p2p. // The court’s ruling means that we as a society must lose the benefits of p2p, even for the totally legal and beneficial uses they serve, simply to assure that there are zero copyright infringements caused by p2p." (Lessig 74)

"to call a copyright a “property” right is a bit misleading,for the property of copyright is an odd kind of property. Indeed,the very idea of property in any idea or any expression is very odd. I understand what I am taking when I take the picnic table you put in your backyard. I am taking a thing,the picnic table, and after I take it, you don’t have it. But what am I taking when I take the good idea you had to put a picnic table in the backyard — by, for example, going to Sears, buying a table, and putting it in my backyard? What is the thing I am taking then?" (Lessig 83)

1710: Statute of Anne, enacting first British copyright

lobbying by Jack Valenti to redefine "creative property" as identical to property per se (and therefore rights over creative property are complete and perpetual)

"We have always treated rights in creative property differently from the rights resident in all other property owners.  They have never been the same.  And they should never be the same, because, however counterintuitive this may seem, to make them the same would be to fundamentally weaken the opportunity for new creators to create.  Creativity depends upon the owners of creativity having less than perfect control." (Lessig 118-19)

on James Boyle's claim that we need an "environmentalism" for culture: "His point, and the point I want to develop in the balance of this chapter, is not that the aims of copyright are flawed.  Or that authors should not be paid for their work.  Or that music should be given away 'for free.' The point is that some of the ways in which we might protect authors will have unintended consequences for the cultural environment, much like DDT had for the natural environment." (Lessig 129)

"My claim is that the Internet should at least force us to rethink the conditions under which the law of copyright automatically applies, because it is clear that the current reach of copyright was never contemplated, much less chosen, by the legislators who enacted copyright law." (Lessig 140)

"Enter the Internet -- a distributed, digital network where every use of a copyrighted work produces a copy.  And because of this single, arbitrary feature of the design of a digital network, the scope of category 1 [unregulated uses] changes dramatically.  Uses that before were presumptively unregulated are now presumptively regulated.  No longer is there a set of presumptively unregulated uses that define a freedom associated with a copyrighted work.  Instead, each use is not subject to the copyright, because each use also makes a copy -- category 1 gets sucked into category 2.  And those who would defend the unregulated uses of copyrighted work must look exclusively to category 3, fair uses, to bear the burden of this shift." (Lessig 143)

"So copyright's duration has increased dramatically -- tripled in the past thirty years.  And copyright's scope has increased as well -- from regulating only publishers to now regulating just about everyone.  And copyright's reach has changed, as every action becomes a copy and hence presumptively regulated.  And as technologists find better ways to control the use of content, and as copyright is increasingly enforced through technology, copyright's force changes, too.  Misuse is easier to find and easier to control.  This regulation of the creative process, which began as a tiny regulation governing a tiny part of the market for creative work, has become the single most important regulator of creativity there is." (Lessig 161-62)

"Free culture is increasingly the casualty in this war on piracy.  In response to a real, if not yet quantified, threat that the technologies of the Internet present to twentieth-century business models for producing and distributing culture, the law and technology are being transformed in a way that will undermine our tradition of free culture." (Lessig 173)

"To fight 'piracy,' to protect 'property,' the content industry has launched a war.  Lobbying and lots of campaign contributions have now brought the government into this war.  As with any war, this one will have both direct and collateral damage.  As with any war or prohibition, these damages will be suffered most by our own people." (Lessig 183)

"Judges and lawyers can tell themselves that fair use provides adequate 'breathing room' between regulation by the law and the access the law should allow.  But it is a measure of how out of touch our legal system has become that anyone actually believes this.  The rules that publishers impose upon writers, the rules that film distributors impose upon filmmakers, the rules that newspapers impose upon journalists -- these are the real laws governing creativity.  And these rules have little relationship to the 'law' with which judges comfort themselves." (Lessig 187)

"Overregulation stifles creativity.  It smothers innovation.  It gives dinosaurs a veto over the future.  It wastes the extraordinary opportunity for a democratic creativity that digital technology enables. // In addition to these important harms, there is one more that was important to our forebears, but seems forgotten today.  Overregulation corrupts citizens and weakens the rule of law." (Lessig 199)

fascinating and self-critical reading of his failed attempt to overturn DMCA in arguing Eldred V. Ashcroft before the Supreme Court!

"The opposition to the Eldred Act reveals how extreme the other side is.  The most powerful and sexy and well loved of lobbies really has as its aim not the protection of 'property' but the rejection of a tradition.  Their aim is not simply to protect what is theirs. *Their aim is to assure that all there is is what is theirs.*" (Lessig 255)

"So uncritically do we accept the idea of property in ideas that we don't even notice how monstrous it is to deny ideas to a people who are dying without them.  So uncritically do we accept the idea of property in culture that we don't even question when the control of that property removes our ability, as a people, to develop our culture democratically." (Lessig 261)

"Why would creators participate in giving up total control? Some participate to better spread their content. Cory Doctorow, for example, is a science fiction author. His first novel, Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom, was released on-line and for free, under a Creative Commons license, on the same day that it went on sale in bookstores. // Why would a publisher ever agree to this? I suspect his publisher reasoned like this: There are two groups of people out there: (1) those who will buy Cory’s book whether or not it’s on the Internet, and (2) those who may never hear of Cory’s book, if it isn’t made available for free on the Internet. Some part of (1) will download Cory’s book instead of buying it. Call them bad-(1)s. Some part of (2) will download Cory’s book, like it, and then decide to buy it. Call them (2)-goods. If there are more (2)-goods than bad-(1)s, the strategy of releasing Cory’s book free on-line will probably increase sales of Cory’s book. // Indeed, the experience of his publisher clearly supports that conclusion. The book’s first printing was exhausted months before the publisher had expected. This first novel of a science fiction author was a total success." (Lessig 284)
