Miller, J. Hillis. “The Problematic of Ending in Narrative.” Nineteenth-Century Fiction 33.1 (June 1978): 3-7.


"It is no accident that the notion of ending in narrative is difficult to pin down, whether 'theoretically,' or for a given novel, or for the novels of a given period. The notion of ending in narrative is inherently 'undecidable.'" (Miller 3)

"Aristotle suggests the possibility of a narrative which would be all unraveling or denouement, in which the "turning-point" from tying to untying would be the beginning of the narrative proper and all the complication would lie prior to the action as its presupposition.... By a strange but entirely necessary paradox, the problem of the ending here becomes displaced to the problem of the beginning. The whole drama is ending and beginning at once, a beginning/ending which must always presuppose something outside of itself, something anterior or ulterior, in order either to begin or to end, in order to begin ending." (Miller 4)

"Any point the spectator focuses on is a turning which both ties and unties. This is another way of saying that no narrative can show either its beginning or its ending. It always begins and ends still *in medias res*, presupposing as a future anterior some part of itself outside itself." (Miller 4)

"Solve, dissolve, resolve -- why this blank contradiction in our images of closure in narrative? Why cannot we describe unambiguously the moment of coming full circle in a final revelation at an end point toward which the whole story has been moving, fixing the characters in a new relation, their final destiny?  This tying/untying would provide the sense of an ending, casting a retrospective unity over the whole. It is most commonly marriage or death. This ending must, however, it seems, simultaneously be thought of as a tying up, a neat knotting leaving no loose threads hanging out, no characters unaccounted for, and at the same time as an untying, as the combing out of the tangled narrative threads so that they may be clearly seen, shining side by side, all mystery or complexity revealed." (Miller 5)

"Death is the most enigmatic, the most open-ended ending of all. It is the best dramatization of the way an ending, in the sense of a clarifying telos, law or ground of the whole story, always recedes, escapes, vanishes. The best one can have, writer or reader, is what Frank Kermode, in his admirable phrase, calls 'the sense of an ending.'" (Miller 6)

"All this problem of endings is neatly tied within another double antithetical word: ravel. The word ravel already means unravel. The "un" adds nothing not already there. To ravel up a story or to unravel it comes to the same thing.  The word cannot be given a closure by however extravagant a series of doubling negatives attempting to make the initial opening into closure: ravel, unravel, un-unravel, un-un-unravel, and so on. In a similar way, no novel can be unequivocally finished, or for that matter unequivocally unfinished." (Miller 6-7)
