Nunberg, Geoffrey. “The Places of Books in the Age of Electronic Reproduction.” Representations 42 (Spring 1993): 13-37.


"'The end of books' -- the phrase must be irresistible to any writer who wants to make his name as a visionary. No prediction could be more evocative of the changes that technology will work on culture, or better calculated to contrast the New Man's easy confidence in the face of the future with the timorous anxiety of the old-style humanist, whose vision of the bookless utopia of Star Trek is clouded by the specters of the bookless dystopias of _1984_ or H.G. Wells's _The Time Machine_. And bibliophiles like Higonnet inevitably rise to the bait, because their fetishism makes them susceptible to the same technological Darwinism the visionaries trade in: once the new artifacts are given a foothold they will move with remorseless logic to displace the old. You think of the passage in _The Hunchback of Notre Dame_ where a scholar holds up an early printed book as he looks at the cathedral and says: "Ceci tuera cela." Except that now he's holding an Apple Powerbook, and the building in the background is the Bibliotheque nationale. // There's a temptation to respond to this with a reassuring ecumenism: 'Not to worry; in the future we'll have books and electronic texts, the old alongside the new,' and so on. This isn't wrong, but the propitiatory tone is misleading; it implies that you can introduce new communication technologies without transforming existing cultural forms. Clearly new technologies will have an effect on the book and the institutions that surround it. The trick is to try to consider these changes without slipping into a totalizing determinism, and above all without assuming that what is at stake is just a matter of artifacts." (Nunberg 13-14)

"books as such -- that is, bound and printed documents -- are not an interesting category. In modern industrial societies, the vast majority of books bear no cultural burden at all: they are parts catalogs, census reports, Department of Agriculture pamphlets, tide tables, tax codes, repair manuals, telephone directories, airline schedules -- documents whose appearance as books rather than in some other form has mostly to do with the practical requirements of display and diffusion and the limits of available technologies."  (Nunberg 14)

of course, when people talk about the book, they're talking about something more:  "The book' here stands in a metonymy for all of the material circumstances of print culture -- not just the artifacts it is inscribed in, but the forms and institutions that have shaped its use. In this broader sense, the question becomes, Can there be print culture after print?" (Nunberg 15)

"these technologies have certain features that force us to temper any millenarian expectations that they will wholly replace the book as vehicles for the conduct of public discourse. I am thinking here not so much of technical limitations that are likely to be overcome in time, but of features inherent in the very properties that make these media seem so superior to print-their ability to store, manipulate, and transmit huge amounts of information at a very low cost; the immateriality of the representations they traffic in; their versatility as tools for the production, diffusion, and reception of texts. What I want to argue here is that it is precisely because these technologies transcend the material limitations of the book that they will have trouble assuming its role." (Nunberg 15)

"There are a lot of reasons why you might want to have Proust online, after all. You can search the text for words and phrases, you can copy passages into other documents, you can annotate the text extensively (electronic representation makes it possible to prepare critical editions of a thoroughness and complexity that are unattainable in print). And what is most important, you can carry it around in a very small space or access it from anywhere with a very small device. In the end, the choice will come down to putting into your briefcase a two-pound copy of _Swann's Way_ or a two-pound computer that contains the whole _Remembrance of Things Past_, not to mention all of the _Nouvelle Revue Française_ and the _Grand Larousse_. // Still, most people are usually content to carry around one book of Proust at a time, and their interest in manipulating the text stops at being able to sit somewhere and turn its pages. And for these purposes, I think it is very unlikely that the computer will replace the book as a reading tool in the way that it has replaced the typewriter as a writing tool." (Nunberg 16)

"If one accepts that the physical volume plays no part in interpretation once the text is delivered to the eye, then it seems to make sense to frame the contrast between the book and the computer in terms of an opposition between the purely perceptual properties of the page and the screen. But there is more to reading than this. As Roger Chartier puts it, 'Reading is not just an abstract operation of intellection: it is an engagement of the body, an inscription in space, a relation to oneself and others.' And even when the electronic display has achieved perceptual parity with the printed page, it will not be equivalent to the book with regard to these other aspects of reading -- corporeal, spatial, and social." (Nunberg 17, quoting Chartier, _L'Ordre de livres_ 20)

"A book doesn't simply contain the inscription of a text, it is the inscription. It is as fat as the text is long, it opens at the beginning of the text, and if we break off our reading, we are left literally *in media res*. This property is crucial to the way we read any book whose content is essentially linear or narrative, as we subconsciously register the external boundaries of the volume in terms of the space between our thumb and forefinger, and reckon our place in the text accordingly." (Nunberg 18)

"Of course windows with scroll bars don't exhaust the devices for representing the reader's place in an electronic text, and other visual metaphors may be more intuitive and less intrusive. But however ingenious these interfaces are, they remain representations, at a physical remove from the boundaries of the text itself. You literally cannot grasp an electronic text in its entirety." (Nunberg 18)

"the bookless library is a very unlikely prospect, just like the paperless office that a number of people were enthusiastically predicting around fifteen years ago." (Nunberg 19)

"Two features, more than anything else, set electronic technologies apart from the technologies of mechanical reproduction that have shaped the cultural role of the book. The first is the versatility of the technology: unlike mechanical antecedents like the printing press, the typewriter, or the telegraph, the computer isn't restricted to a single role in production or diffusion. In fact, the technology tends to erase distinctions between the separate processes of creation, reproduction, and distribution that characterize the classic industrial model of print commodities, not just because the electronic technology employed is the same at each stage, but because control over the processes can be exercised at any point." (Nunberg 21)

"The second important difference between the two technologies follows from the immateriality of electronic representations and the resulting reductions in the cost of reproduction." (Nunberg 21)

"electronic reproduction has more in common with the fourteenth-century scriptorium than with the print capitalism that replaced it. In the electronic world, as in the scriptorium, texts are "copied" (that is, transferred, downloaded, displayed, or printed) by individual users when and where they are needed." (Nunberg 22)

"The most notable success to date is the kind of informal public exchange that we find in electronic bulletin boards, discussion groups, and the like. And these in turn make possible a variety of forms of self-publishing. If you've written an article about the Gulf War or about object-oriented programming that you want to make available to a large readership, you can simply post it where other people can get access to it and send the equivalent of a publication notice to all the relevant distribution lists and bulletin boards. In a sense, this signals the reappearance of the pamphlet, a publication genre that hasn't played an important part in English-language public discourse since the time of Shelley..." (Nunberg 24)

"But the shift to electronic publication wouldn't be possible in the absence of a social organization that enables scientific communities to compensate for features of print discourse that are lost in the transition. For example, electronic publication by itself can't canonize an article in the way that publication in a prestigious print journal or review can, partly because of the reduction of editorial authority, and partly because the form of publication provides no guarantee that other members of the community will have seen the article. In scientific communities, however, formal publication isn't the only or even the most important way of bringing research to the attention of the relevant audience. A large part of scientific discourse is transacted through seminars, conference papers, exchanges of photocopies, and most important, in informal discussions among practitioners (a type of discourse that electronic communication extends and enhances in very useful ways). So by the time an important paper appears in press, it's usually old news to most of the people who matter -- the final publication of a result or theory confirms its status as a public fact rather than creating it." (Nunberg 24-25)

"In this context, works could become public without having been formally published -- and nothing would be published, in any event, before it was submitted to the critical discussion of a coffeehouse, club, or salon, the equivalents of the modern scientific conference and system of peer review." (Nunberg 26)

"A number of other things being equal, I see no reason why _The Spectator_ and _The Tatler_ could not have been distributed electronically. But it is harder to imagine electronic equivalents for the new periodicals that began to appear in the mid eighteenth century, like _The Gentleman's Magazine_ or Johnson's _Rambler_, when the booksellers became the mediators of a public discourse that had been transformed into an exchange between a putatively anonymous author and the 'reading public,' a community defined primarily by its participation in the print discourse itself." (Nunberg 26)

on the personally customizable electronic newspaper (and as opposed to Anderson's sense that the newspaper creates the nation):  "But precisely because of its power and versatility, this form of publication will have difficulty in filling the role of the traditional newspaper as a guarantor of uniform experience. A reader has no way of knowing whether other people are reading the same stories that he is, or whether they are being given the same evaluation of the relative importance of news as conveyed by the page layout of the conventional newspaper." (Nunberg 29)

"the properties of electronic documents may make it more difficult for them to achieve this kind of public status. The problem here is a kind of paradox of accessibility. The great virtue of these technologies is that they allow us to make a document 'accessible' without having physically to reproduce or distribute it -- it is enough to post it on a server where users can get to it. (That is, the technologies break the historical connection between reproduction and publicity implicit in the etymology of the word *publish*.)" (Nunberg 30)

"This is of course a great hope of enthusiasts, who point to electronic discussion groups and bulletin boards where "virtual communities" can take shape around a general critical discussion. The phenomenon is undeniable, but it is not clear whether these communities can be assembled at the scale of the modern reading public -- the assumption that is implicit, say, in the claim that the "electronic town hall" will become the functional equivalent of the discursive institutions of the nineteenth-century American small town, but conducted over a continent. The difficulties here are analogous to the problems we have seen with other electronic forms. For one thing, the absence of material constraints on participation tends to make these discussion groups unmanageably prolix when they get over a certain size.... The second difficulty follows from the indifference of electronic publication to constraints of time and space. It can be difficult to project the 'virtual communities' of the net into actual communities that are 'rooted in everyday life,' to use Anderson's term-another difference between the electronic newspaper and its print equivalent, which circulates in an actual public space. The participants in electronic discussions can be anywhere, and the ease with which messages can be duplicated, forwarded, and reposted makes it very difficult to estimate the size or location of their audience." (Nunberg 31-32)
