Nunberg, Geoffrey. “Introduction.” In The Future of the Book. Ed. Geoffrey Nunberg. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996. 9-20.


"the parties have more in common than either of them supposes.  The bibliophiles' reactions are undeniably colored by fetishism, as witness their disproportionate concern about the difficulty of curling up in bed with a computer.... But the enthusiasts of the new technology are not exactly innocent of fetishism either, both for their sleek new toys and for the obsessive idle manipulations that they encourage.  And it is probably these conflicting fetishisms that lead both sides to adopt a particularly concrete and implacable variety of technological determinism.  They assume not just that the future of discourse hinges entirely on the artifacts that mediate it, but that artifacts and hence cultural epochs can only supersede one another..." (Nunberg 9)

"But unlike the postmodernists and postindustrialists -- and indeed, unlike McLuhan -- most of the enthusiasts of the new technologies have no real interest in advancing a historical thesis.  The invocations of Gutenberg serve chiefly to demonstrate that the present situation is at least epochal, if not wholly unprecedented.  And the point of their historical determinism, you sense, is chiefly to establish their right to control the cultural moment and the material resources that it commands.  This is how the future will be, they say, and the only choice we have in the matter is to get on board or to stand in the station as the train pulls away.  People who say that tomorrow belongs to them are usually angling for a piece of today." (Nunberg 11)
