Robbins, Bruce. “Death and Vocation: Narrativizing Narrative Theory.” PMLA 107.1 (January 1992): 38-50.


"The impulse to narrate, as theorists like Jean-François Lyotard and Hayden White note, is an impulse to seek legitimation. Why do we find it indispensable to insert our sense of our work into publicly accessible narratives? It may be not because, in corridors or cafeterias, we want for a moment to speak no longer as professionals when we comment on our roles but, on the contrary, because professionalism itself demands that we render some public account of ourselves in order to ground our professions in the legitimacy of public opinion.  According to this principle, which has the backing of much recent work in historical sociology, even the narrative that describes theory as a symptom of professional pathology could be interpreted as entirely professional -- that is, as an effort to distinguish and legitimate a genuine self for the profession by defining and expelling a usurper, theory.  At any rate, casual narratives like this should be seen to perform, with whatever justice or success, a necessary function -- one that is also performed, more obliquely, by other, more formal narratives, like those of literary history." (Robbins 38)

"My restricted illustration of this general argument is the rise of narrative theory and the controversies within it. As narrative, beginning in the 1960s, has competed in effect to replace literature as our object of knowledge, on what has it rested its claims to professional authority? One answer is death. Critics from Walter Benjamin to Frank Kermode and Peter Brooks identify death as the source of meaning and authority for narrative. Unlike other sources that have been suggested, however, death seems to provoke interest beyond the circle of academic critics. My hypothesis, then, is that the competition between various theories of narrative can be narrativized as a contest both over how to define our critical object and over how to relate professional expertise to public interest." (Robbins 39)

"Skepticism about chronology as such should be considered, first of all, as a result of the disputing of particular, exclusive chronologies by the 'new social movements' of the 1960s. Chronology, as representatives of these movements have pointed out, creates the illusion of a single subject moving through time. thereby obscuring or marginalizing different, simultaneous social actors. It has thus stood in the way of women and minority groups fighting for the right to representation within and against narratives whose single collective subject leaves no room for their differences." (Robbins 39)

"Periodization seems to have won the most hostility by facilitating professional 'identity cards' that define obligatory units of academic initiation and professional credentialling (and that manifest what Mary Poovey calls, in another context, 'the involuntary periodicity of the reproductive system" [7]) and thus also by dictating departmental hiring policies. What is really and rightly detested about periods is their authority in the professional division of labor. a partitioning in time that walls off social space." (Robbins 40, quoting Poovey, _Unequal Developments_)

"Carving out autonomous feudal fiefdoms that can be moved only one by one, the privatized department effectively resists any large collective change of the sort proposed by cultural studies, feminism, and theory." (Robbins 40)

"If we can agree, whatever our epistemologies, that periodization is a professional practice occurring in the present and that, professionally speaking, periods are fictions or constructs that both enable and restrain scholarly research, then we can go on to consider a further reason for periodic unease: the role of periods in our narratives of professional legitimation, the work we ask them to do in defining for ourselves a sense of vocation." (Robbins 40)

"For better or worse, the nineteenth century is associated with *rising* narratives-for example, Lyotard's "grands récits" of emancipation and enlightenment or, alternatively, the narratives through which the century largely presented itself to me as a graduate student, narratives of secularization and democratization. Seen from our professional present, these stories about the nineteenth century reassemble themselves into narratives of a twentieth-century quest for vocation." (Robbins 40)

"In a moment of autobiographical indulgence, I have asked myself what logic there might be in the fact that my own at least minimally successful professional life should have begun with the final failure of the protagonist in the novel of vocation -- in the trajectory that goes, as Donald Fanger says, from *Great Expectations* to *Lost Illusions* (8). One (collective) answer to this question is that the concluding drop, whether of narratives produced in the nineteenth century or of those from the twentieth that concern the nineteenth, has been valued as a rhetorical support for our humanist commitment to the pastness of the past. In other words, we have had to devalue the present. which is the period of periodizing utterance, in order to produce or underwrite the greater value of the past cultural objects that we have mainly felt we were paid to speak about. including those of the nineteenth century itself. This can be put even more grossly: telling contemporary society it is a commercially and technologically degraded wasteland is not the worst way of persuading it to support those who claim to preserve and transmit the memory of what it has lost." (Robbins 41, quoting Fanger, _Doetoevsky and Romantic Realism_)

"At the time when I was making my career decisions, a few lines from Walter Benjamin suggested to me that narrative, precisely because it was a matter of life and death, was well worth devoting one's life to. 'The storyteller,' Benjamin writes, 'has borrowed his authority from death.' Death 'imparts to everything that concerned him that authority which even the poorest wretch in dying possesses for the living around him. This authority is at the very source of the story' (94)." (Robbins 42, quoting Benjamin, "The Storyteller," in _Illuminations_)

"Why should death seem able to bestow authority on narrative? And how does that authority get transferred, as it were, becoming a compelling reason for d student to choose narrative as a personally meaningful object of professional study? How is it that by this relay of authorities, death can seem to offer the authority of vocation?" (Robbins 42)

"Narrative, a provincial youth among older, more prestigious objects of criticism, like poetry, literature, and fiction, would seem to deserve its own bildungsroman. Its rise within the profession belongs, like the new social movements and the rediscovery of Benjamin, to the 1960s." (Robbins 42)

"It is in the 1960s that one begins to hear less about the 'theory of the novel' and more about the 'theory of narrative.' And it is also then, Prince goes on, that the term spreads out to other intellectual enterprises and domains: philosophy, anthropology, even the natural sciences (200; my trans.). It seems clear that the rise of narrative to authority within literary criticism coincides with, and helps account for, a phase of imperialism in which our discipline has asserted authority over other disciplines." (Robbins 42, quoting Gerald Prince, "La thème du récit")

"Within literary studies, narrative is everywhere spoken against, and precisely because it is taken to embody authority. Laura Mulvey writes that the 'distrust of narrative closure' has 'always been a point of principle for the feminist avant-garde' (3). In fact, the distrust of narrative seems to be a point of principle for critics as diverse as Roland Barthes and E. M. Forster. If narrative means militant indeterminacy or relativism to some, to others it is something excessively determined, a hyperstructured vehicle of dogmatic belief that desperately needs to be relativized. It is associated with the illegitimate authority of the foregone conclusion and of the pregiven telos, with social or psychological resolution, with an orderly conventionality imposed on the meaningless successiveness of historical reality, with the tyranny of single, authoritative meaning. In short, narrative figures at once as an agency that produces skepticism and as an object that requires skepticism." (Robbins 42, quoting Mulvey,
"Changes: Thoughts on Myth, Narrative and
Historical Experience")

"Speaking of 'the tendency today... to absorb the narrative [the 'sequence of events'] into the present discourse of the writer in the process of writing,' Genette concludes: 'Perhaps narrative... is already for us, as art was for Hegel, a thing of the past, which we must hurry to consider as it retreats, before it has completely disappeared from our horizon' (143)." (Robbins 43, quoting Genette, "Frontiers of Narrative"; insertion his)

"Genette's narrative of narrative theory: his account of how the determinate vulgarity of story (the sequence of events) is assimilated into the indeterminate sophistication of discourse (the mode of presentation of the events). This narrative, which I describe as a social allegory of evolution from barbarism to civilization, can be framed both domestically and internationally. It proceeds geographically from 'the rest' to the West." (Robbins 46)

"But this generous gesture raises the question of what our supposed competence (that is, our authority) consists of. I paraphrase Raymond Carver: what do we talk about when we talk about narrative? The answer, if a large historical reduction is permissible, has been that we talk about irony, about all the ways in which the meanings of a sequence of events are not after all inherent in the sequence but are dependent on and generated by its mode of presentation." (Robbins 46)

"When Lévi-Strauss and his followers revolutionized the study of narrative in the 1960s, helping to make it more vital than was the concept of the novel or even of fiction, they wrote of course in the context of decolonization. France was losing wars of national liberation in Indochina and Algeria, wars that clearly belonged to the global pattern, since World War II, of self-assertion and independence by former colonies. In the intellectual domain, these developments were accompanied by a critique of Eurocentrism and by openness to Third World voices, exemplified in Lévi-Strauss's effort to break down the loaded opposition between history, which belonged to Europe, and myth, which characterized the 'savage mind.'" (Robbins 46)

"Though Lévi-Strauss makes a sort of 'Third Worldist' case, he defines myth -- which broadens into narrative -- in such a way that it can be comprehended only by a European professional, far removed from face-to-face contact with the "primitive." The new vocation that he self-consciously negotiates for anthropologists is -- and this is a paradox I work with throughout this essay -- both populist, or responsive to emergent constituencies, and professionally privileged, or even authoritarian.  The more general context should not be idealized either. If literature departments in America chose to accept the sudden influx of anthropological and linguistic vocabulary from the Continent, it is in part because, in a neocolonial era when the United States was shouldering what many saw as new global 'responsibilities,' there was a new pressure on the nation's provincialism, a pressure to adopt more global or universal categories of thought. Linguistics and anthropology could claim greater universality within the same domain -- the domain of language and cultural symbols -- than could literature departments that clung to a narrower view of their object of study. But when literature departments embraced this challenge and expanded their object -- as they did, notably, through the expansive, bridging concept of narrative -- they could and did turn the line of influence around, so that in a short time it was the anthropologists who were coming to literary criticism for wisdom about the narrativity of ethnographic writing. The positive authority of narrative to represent those who had been unrepresented could also be a new claim to authority specifically on behalf of literary criticism. I see no reason to regret the authority that the discipline thus gained." (Robbins 47)

"The same initial effort to police the border between "us" and "them" that narrative had opened up appears in _The Sense of an Ending_, by Frank Kermode, which more than any other book of the 1960s seems to base an explanation of the vocation of literary studies specifically on narrative. For Kermode, 'the skepticism of the clerisy' is the correct professional attitude toward narrative (24). The mininarrative that exemplifies this skepticism is 'tick tock': these two different sounds, one beginning and one ending, for what is in fact indiscriminate ticking are a paradigm for the arbitrariness of all the fictions we impose on the chaotic flux of time (44-45). The clerisy earns its privileges by distinguishing between fictions, which know their own arbitrariness, and myths, which are unconscious of being arbitrary." (Robbins 47-48, quoting Kermode)

"Thus the vocational program authorized by 'clerkly skepticism' involves disciplining the lower or other, who comes easily (too easily) to the inferior, unself-conscious pleasures of plot and must be taught to accept 'harder satisfactions.'" (Robbins 48, quoting Kermode)

"the vocational power of _The Sense of an Ending_ would be incomprehensible if elite skepticism toward narrative paradigms were the whole story. In fact, the book takes just as much of its power from a democratic grounding of narrative in the certainty of death." (Robbins 48)

"This democratizing of narrative is also a democratizing of vocation. Kermode explicitly identifies the social category of professional critics with the antinarrativist position: they are the 'clerisy of skepticism.' But those whose bread and butter is narrative irony and unreliability have trouble appealing for support to a public whose beliefs (or narratives) they hold in contempt. Yet their vocation also cannot sustain itself on the consciousness that in a world of believers it alone makes a specialization of self-consciousness. To use death to justify narrative, however, is to appeal to a matter of broad and, as it were, democratic interest. Here the authority of narrative, hence that of those who interpret narrative, rests not on skepticism -- or, finally, on death itself -- but rather on the number of human beings who acknowledge death as their concern. Death confers authority on both narrative and vocation only by first soliciting it from a broadened public." (Robbins 49)

"I am not asserting that death is the '"storiness" of the story,' the foundation of narrative. Nor am I trying to defend narrative as the most eligible professional replacement for literature -- though I hope I do something to open debate on the dominance of discourse over story in the theory of narrative. Both death and narrative function here as examples, representing the rhetoric by which any profession negotiates support for itself, gives itself a social project or vocation, through its fashioning and refashioning of its disciplinary object. Narrative has risen as an object within the discipline even while being ceaselessly attacked, I suggest, because it permits and encourages contradictory new versions of vocation: on the one hand, considerations of discourse lead us to a new claim to autonomy, and, on the other, attending to story makes us responsive to our public constituency." (Robbins 49)
