Walker, Jill.  "Distributed Narrative: Telling Stories Across Networks." Conference paper.  Association of Internet Researchers 5.0, Brighton, England, 21 September 2004.  Available online:  [http://huminf.uib.no/~jill/txt/AoIR-distributednarrative.pdf]


"This paper attempts to provide a map of distributive narratives.  This is not an easy task, because it is hard to describe and locate things that are not *things* but connections." (Walker 1)

"Trying to see how narratives can be split open and spread like this is important, because narratives are one of our main ways of understanding ourselves and of understanding our world.  When the world changes, our ways of understanding it must change too, and as distributed narrative becomes increasingly commong, we need to try to understand this new and sometimes invisible way of seeing and communicating who we are" (Walker 1-2)

need to begin map of field by understanding "the ways in which we've usually demanded that narratives and drama should have *unity*, the opposite of distribution" (Walker 2)

Aristotelian unities of time, place, and action

"The web, and our networked culture, nurtures the breaking down of a different side of unity: the unities of distribution and of delivery.  Although modern drama -- or Shakespeare -- may break each of the dramatic unities, the work usually remains identifiable as a unity" (Walker 2)

"In this paper, I begin exploring the ways in which the *distribution* of narrative works is fragmented, with a particular emphasis on how networked technology such as the web, email and text messaging nurtures this kind of distributed narrative" (Walker 3)

"it's not simply that we lack the words or even, perhaps, the grammar to think clearly about things that are not *things*, it's also that culturally we're used to products and commodities, objects that can be sold and maybe mass-produced" (Walker 3)

on intertextuality:  "In the essay where she coined the term, Julia Kristeva wrote that 'any text is constructed as a mosaic of quotations; any text is the absorption and transformation of another'.  Intertextuality is obviously related to the idea of a distributed narrative, as is Eco's concept of the *open work*, but both Kristeva's and Eco's terms refer to the connections and openings of ideas rather than the physical disintegration of the artifact in which a narrative is presented" (Walker 4, quoting Kristeva, "Bakhtine, le mot, le dialogue, et le roman" and Eco, *Opera aperta*)

transforms Aristotelian unities into:
"1.  Distribution in Time:  The reader, player or viewer experiences the narrative in bits and pieces over a period of time.
2.  Distribution in Space:  There is no single place in which the whole narrative can be experienced....
3.  Distribution of Authorship:  No single author or group of authors has complete control of the narrative" (Walker 5)

of distribution in time:  "Most novels and story-based games need several sessions to complete, like *Mrs. Dalloway* or *Neverwinter Nights*.  In works like these, the time of reception is episodic, though the work as a whole is clearly delimited.  Some works are also published serially, like the soap operas and sit coms we watch on television or the original publication of Dickens' novels, with episodes released at regular intervals and an overall story that may or may not have a planned ending" (Walker 6)

"Episodic narratives are particularly well-suited to our style of reading on the internet.  Usability guru Jakob Nielsen had notoriously pointed out that users *don't* read on the web, they scan and skim" (Walker 6, quoting Nielsen, "How Users Read on the Web")

"Weblogs are an obvious example of the success of serial narrative on the web.  Most posts in weblogs are short enough to be read in a few minutes.  Instead of watching a twenty-two minute long episode each week, a weblog is read in two- or five-minute sessions once a day or once every few days or at irregular intervals.  Added up, regular readers of a weblog spend a considerable number of hours perusing their favourite blogs over the years" (Walker 6-7)

"Narratologist Mieke Bal argues that focalisation is the most important means by which a *fabula*, or chronologically and logically [structured?] sequence of events, is presented as a story.  Focalisation is one of the foundations of most blogging: it is 'the connection between the events that make up the fabula and the one or more subjects whose "perspective" or "point of view" on -- or whose subjective engagement with -- the events is represented in the narrative'" (Walker 7, quoting Bal, *Narratology*)

"This is real-time narrative in the first person, as Elouise Oyzon has called blogging, and it fascinates us" (Walker 7)

"As posts in a blog point to other threads of the story that an individual reader may or may not have already read, so each sticker in *Implementation* contains implicit links to other stickers, links which are not usually necessary to follow in order to appreciate the sticker in question, but which signal to the reader that there is more here. // This technique is different to the recap of many television serials, because the viewer of a television serial is not usually able to follow such implicit links.  A cliffhanger at the end of an episode is common, in order to make the viewer come back next week for more, but the implicit links of distributed narrative are instead invitations that encourage the audience to go and find more.  Now.  They are promises that there is more to find, or perhaps more that is not being said" (Walker 10) -- I'm not sure the serial "recap" is the best point of comparison here; I'd perhaps point instead to the implicit links created by the mysteries in shows such as Lost, which require the reader to fill in ellipses with information gained in other episodes

"Another way in which narrative can be distributed access media is by combining a website narration, like a weblog or online diary, with textual performance in other media, as when Isabella V., the possibly fictional protagonist of *She's a Flight Risk*, steps outside of her weblog to ping her readers in iChat or to participate in interviews.  Kaycee Nicole, the famously fictional teenaged web diarist who 'died' of leukemia in 2002, paralleled this exactly.  'Kaycee' particpated in chats and email conversations in addition to writing frequent diary entries at her website.  Of course the same is true of completely 'real' webloggers, like myself: if my various self-representations on the web can be read as a narrative (and that may not be the best descriptive term), then this narrative is distributed across my own website, emails, chats, MUDs and conference papers" (Walker 15)

"In closeknit communities, like LiveJournal, the narration of weblogs sometimes seems like a group autobiography.  In clusters of academic weblogs, which my blog belongs to, narrators sometimes visit each other, or visit the same conferences, and so new constellations of narratives grow forth" (Walker 16)

"On the surface, the idea of a book written as a blog seems reasonable.  After all, epistolary novels have a rich history that is integral to the development of the novel itself.  If letters from many of the characters in an epistolary fiction are collected, as they are in *Liaisons Dangereuses*, for instance, the narrative is certainly dispersed across several different narrators.  Blog novels miss out on links, of course, but just importantly, they miss our on the blogrolls of links to related blogs, they miss out on the RSS feeds of other bloggers who were at the same event and wrote about the hero of the first blog, they miss out on the temporality of only being able to read a blog in the tempo that it is written, they miss out on the active searching for a distributed narrative" (Walker 16)

"Unfortunately, this distribution of narratives across blogs is not only elusive and difficult to catch and describe: with blogs that are not fiction, it is also ethically problematic.  I've mentioned Justin Hall's blog because he has narrated his life online for so long, and so explicitly in public, that I see his blog as apublication as much as an autobiography published on paper.  Yet to really trace the shapes of the distributed narrative around his site would mean studying the stories narrated by his friends.  Although these sites are public, and their authors are well-aware that their words are read by many, my pinpointing connections and analysing relationships by the words in which they are told seems to cross a boundary that should not be crossed" (Walker 17) -- why?  I'm not sure I follow the logic here.  It may feel like prying, or snooping, or something else voyeuristic in nature, but if all the material is out there, publicly available, what is the ethical problem in reading it, and interpreting it?  Is it that we feel that there's something dehumanizing in treating a "real" person as if he were a character?  But shouldn't we understand representations of Justin on the internet as being fully distinct from some actually existing Justin out in the world, in such a way that online-Justin in fact becomes a character of sorts?  Isn't there sufficient agency in the flesh-and-blood Justin's decisions about what to represent (and what to "allow" his friends to represent) that we should feel free to interpret what's there?

[1]:     http://huminf.uib.no/~jill/txt/AoIR-distributednarrative.pdf 
